I'm Kristin Forster,
I work in the Cocoa Frameworks group and
I'd like to welcome you to session 106,
Taking Advantage of
Leopard Features in Cocoa.
Today we're going to dive into three
of the features that Chris covered
in his What's New in Cocoa talk.
We're going to talk about the
benefits of these features and
we're going to show how to adopt
them using TextEdit as an example.
We'll show some problems you may run
into and talk about how to solve them.
And our goal is that you leave
this session ready to take
advantage of Leopard features
in your Cocoa application.
First,
Ali Ozer is going to talk about 64-bit.
Some 64-bit libraries
are available on Tiger.
On Leopard, 64-bit has been brought
to the Cocoa frameworks.
With a fairly mechanical conversion,
you can make your
application 64-bit aware,
and we provide a top
script to make this easy.
Once you have done this conversion,
you can take advantage of 64-bit
capabilities in your application.
Next, Mark Piccirelli is going to talk
about uniform type identifiers.
Uniform type identification is
a type system that encapsulates
file name extensions,
MIME types, OS types,
and other information.
You may already be using uniform type
identifiers if you've written a spotlight
importer for your custom document format.
On Leopard,
you can use uniform type identifiers
throughout your application to
simplify your type management and
to improve your interoperability
with the rest of the system.
Lastly, Kevin Perry is going to talk
about resolution independence.
Resolution independence allows your
user interface to be drawn at the
same physical size regardless of
the pixel density of the display.
We had some support for
resolution independence in Tiger.
In Leopard, we have improved and extended
this support and most notably,
most standard user interface
elements are now drawn using
resolution independent artwork.
Now I'd like to invite Ali Ozer
up on stage to talk about 64-bit.
Good morning.
So 64-bit is one of the major
big things that we've done,
of course, throughout, across Leopard,
and Cocoa is, of course,
also one of these areas where
we did a lot of changes.
So let me first define what 64-bit is.
64-bit,
the most fundamental definition of 64-bit
is support for 64-bit address space.
32-bit supports 4 gigabytes,
and 64-bit supports 4 billion times that.
And, you know, if you were to have one
fundamental definition,
it's 64-bit pointers.
That's what 64-bit means.
64-bit is very interesting for
applications which need more than
4 gigabytes of address space.
These are applications that
have already been asking for
64-bits for some time now,
and clearly they're a good
target group to move over.
But it's also potentially interesting
for other applications as well.
Now I'm not going to go into
details or motivations for that now,
but this afternoon,
2:00 p.m., after lunch, in Marina,
64-bit overview is where we'll
cover this topic in more detail.
64-bit uses the LP64 data model.
Simon mentioned this.
It's longs and pointers change to 64-bit.
So pointers are 64,
the long data type is 64,
and all other data types remain the same.
So here's a handy little chart
showing you what happens.
And again,
you can see everything remains the same.
And one interesting item here is
the fact that the int data type,
which used to be 4-byte,
is still 4 bytes.
Now, in Cocoa APIs,
as most of you are probably aware,
integral values are almost
always int or unsigned int.
And this includes APIs which
should support 64-bit
quantities in a 64-bit process.
This includes things like NSData.
You know,
you really want NSData to represent
files larger than 4 gigabytes.
Same with, in fact,
array and string as well.
These methods, instead of returning ints,
you really want them
to be 64-bit capable.
So one possible solution here is why
not change ints in these APIs to longs?
In that case,
an SRA method such as count would
start returning unsigned long,
and object index would start
taking unsigned long as well,
and that would make them 64-bit
capable on a 64-bit environment.
Now, however, that's not what we did.
The major reason we didn't do this
is the fact that if we change ints
to longs in all these APIs while
keeping the APIs the same,
this might have adverse effects
on existing 32-bit applications.
It's very important that we maintain
binary compatibility as we change stuff.
And if we change ints
to longs in methods,
although that's totally compatible
in the 32-bit world from a size,
you know, 4 bytes, 4 bytes,
it does change the method signatures
in the runtime to some degree.
It doesn't actually change, you know,
the method name, but the method metadata.
It also would require some
source code changes on your part.
So even though you might not
care at all about 64-bit,
by compiling under Leopard,
you might find yourself having to change
your source code to accommodate this.
So we decided not to do this.
So we leave 32-bit as is.
Now what we really want
is something like this.
If we're compiling for 64-bit,
we want the count
method to return a long,
and if we're compiling for 32,
we want it to return an int.
Of course, this solution.
Where we do this per method
is very unwieldy because,
you know,
depending on how many methods we do,
you're going to have all these alternate
declarations for every one of them,
and that's going to get messy.
So, you know, it's not exactly.
We don't want to do exactly this,
but in spirit, this is what we want.
So we introduce two new types
and NSInteger and NSUInteger.
And here are the way they're defined.
Now first thing to note is
this underbar underbar LP64.
This is the way we know that we're
under the 64-bit environment.
If we're in the 64-bit environment,
we define NSInteger and NSUnteger to
be long and unsigned long respectively.
Otherwise, we define them to be
int and unsigned int.
And that's the only sort of
conditional declaration we have.
So with this,
then we go through the APIs where
we want to make this change,
and we change int to NSInteger,
unsigned it to NSUInteger,
and the NSArray methods
now look like this.
Instead of unsigned int,
it's returning an NSUInteger,
and instead of unsigned
int and object index,
it's taking an NSUInteger.
And note that in the 32-bit world,
this is still the same exact thing.
It's an unsigned int.
So now the question is,
what API should we do this in?
We already mentioned data,
we already mentioned array and string,
and there are good reasons
for doing it there.
But what other APIs?
Well, attributed string is very
heavily based on string,
and text storage is a
subclass of attributed string.
So if we're going to do string,
we decide that we should
really do attributed string.
It would be weird to not have
attributed string do this.
But if you do those,
then you really need to do text view,
because text view uses attributed
string as its backing store,
and it seems weird to have
attributed strings capable of more
than 4 gigabytes and text view not.
NSRange and IndexSet are a type
and a class which we use very
frequently in all of these APIs to
represent ranges and so on.
And since we want to
represent ranges in strings,
text, etc., NSRange has to also be able
to represent 64-bit quantities,
and the same goes for IndexSet.
So we pull those in, too.
TableView and OutlineView are often
used with these other classes.
The backing store of a
TableView is often an array.
TableViews represent ranges of
elements with range and IndexSet,
so I think these should
come into the fold as well.
Now, Matrix and Browser,
they don't want to be left out,
so they bring them into the fold.
And, you know, after a while,
this mental exercise says,
"Let's just do everything." And let
me talk about the benefits of
why we'd want to do everything.
First of all, it gives us much better
impedance match across APIs.
You can take the return from any method,
you know it's 64-bit capable,
and pass it to any other method,
and you know it's 64-bit capable.
What this means, for instance,
is you don't have to
worry about truncation.
My array count could return a
number greater than 4 gigabytes,
but if table we did not accept a
value greater than 4 gigabytes,
every time you call this
method or something like this,
you'd have to worry,
what do I do if it's not big enough?
By making them both capable of 64-bit,
the problem really becomes the rect
of row method needs to worry about it.
If it itself cannot deal with
more than 4 gigabytes internally,
you know it will do something,
but at least the APIs are consistent.
This is also compatible with the
CF index type and core foundation.
As you know,
we use toll-free bridging between
foundation and core foundation classes,
so data types go back and
forth in various cases,
and having NSInteger be compatible
with CF index is quite important.
And finally, you know,
one big... One big reason is
this whole consistency story.
Now, as API providers, us,
or those of you who do APIs,
you don't have to worry about,
should this be 32-bit,
should this be 64-bit?
You know, the answer is clear,
even if sometimes it seems
like 64-bit is overkill,
there's no decision.
And as, you know, API consumers,
when you're using an API,
you don't have to guess whether
it's 32- or 64-bit compatible.
So it's the whole consistency story.
In addition to NSInteger and NSUInteger,
we have one more change,
and that concerns the float data type.
Now both Quartz and Cocoa and
other Cocoa-based APIs in
Mac OS X use the float data type
for specifying graphical quantities.
This includes coordinates, sizes,
color components, and so on.
Now floats are great.
Floats are already a step above what
some other systems did or we used to do
with fixed numbers or integers and so on.
They have a large range and
they have good accuracy.
However, sometimes it's not good enough.
We do get bugs from developers who say,
I have a view that's 10 million
pixels or 10 million points high,
and when I scroll to the bottom,
it's just not pixel perfect.
Or when I zoom in 800 times in my view,
things are not, you know,
weird things are happening
with the drawing.
And that's because floating point numbers
start to fall apart at those limits.
So what we decide to do is in 64-bit,
instead of float, we're switching to the
double in all these APIs.
So again, we have another CG float type
introduced in Quartz and used
in Cocoa and Carbon as well to
represent these graphical quantities.
And note that all dependent
types like NSRect,
NSSize, etc.
are also in Cocoa.
And we're also now in terms of this type.
The interesting thing about this change,
by the way,
is it's not dictated by the LP64 change.
It has nothing to do with 64-bit,
but we're taking advantage of
this binary incompatibility change
to introduce this other change.
Okay,
so let me talk about porting to 64-bit.
Some source code changes
aren't necessary to port.
You know,
you might take your application,
you might try to build it,
and it might build if you're lucky.
However, changes are likely needed.
First of all,
there are a number of deprecated,
unavailable APIs.
You might have to get off those.
In addition,
if you do not change your source code,
and if you're using ints and floats,
it's likely that your program will not
be taking full advantage of 64-bit.
So you really want to
switch to NS integers,
NSU integers,
CG floats throughout your code
to take advantage of 64-bit when
you convert your application.
The good thing is we provide the
script to help you convert your code,
and it's a TOPS script.
So some of you might be wondering, TOPS?
Is this some new thing Apple has done?
And the answer is no,
it's been there about 15, 16 years, but,
you know, it still feels pretty fresh.
It's sort of a refactoring engine of
sorts that works on C and Objective-C.
And it basically, you give it a script,
and you give it some source files,
and it does its thing in place.
And now I want to show you
how to run this on TextEdit.
Can we switch to the demo machine,
please?
Okay, now as I said,
it does work in place.
So first thing you want to do is
you want to take your sources and
you want to make a copy of them.
So here I have the
Tiger sources for text edit.
I'm going to go ahead and duplicate this.
There you go, text edit, tiger copy,
and let's just call it new so
it's clear what we're doing.
Now, TOPS requires a terminal window.
We have not yet integrated
into any of the new refactoring
things we have in Xcode.
Now, I want to go into that folder.
Let's just drag and drop here.
And you want to run TOPS.
Now, one argument you can give TOPS is
the semi-verbose argument,
which means show me what you're doing.
Then you specify this script file,
and the script file in
this case is developer,
extras, 64-bit, Cocoa.TOPS.
And then you give it the name of
the files you want to run it on.
We just want to run it
on all our source files,
H files and M files.
So here is how you might run TOPS.
Go ahead and run it.
And it runs through your files,
and it's done.
As you can see, it showed the progress.
And text edit isn't very big,
so it was pretty quick.
We can hide terminal.
Now, next thing I want to do
is launch File Merge.
And File Merge is the best way to
look at what the TOPS script did.
I'm going to open this
File Merge window a bit.
This allows me to drag
the original sources here.
[Transcript missing]
Now, you're looking at this thinking,
Windows count,
and this need saving argument here is
the number of documents that need saving.
These are not quantities that are
ever going to be more than 4 billion,
ever.
So this change seems unnecessary,
and I'm going to undo it.
On the other hand, the truth is,
these values were never going
to be up to 32-bit anyway.
We used an int in the 32-bit world,
and truthfully,
you could have used a short.
You might have even used a char.
But we went ahead and used int,
because that's the
natural thing for 32-bits.
And in 64-bit,
the natural thing is to use long.
So in cases like this,
where you have local variables,
arguments,
go ahead and use the NSU integer.
Don't fight it.
Just accept it, and things will be fine.
And really, in 64-bit world,
these things are in registers,
and they're plenty fast.
So that's the one kind of
change you'll see TOPS doing.
Now, another kind of change is down here,
this one.
TOPS will drop these pound
warnings in your code where
it thinks it wants your help.
In this case, it dropped this,
because it saw a call
to string with format,
and it wasn't sure how
to handle the arguments.
Now, note that there's a %d here,
and the argument it
corresponds to is need saving,
which is an NSU integer.
Now, %d refers to an int.
You would need to do %ld for long,
while need saving is going to be
int in 32-bit and long in 64-bit.
We don't have a % specifier
for an NSU integer.
So this is a case where you sort
of have to think about what to do.
And the recommended solution that
we do is just go ahead and use %ld.
Oh, and to edit in FileMerge,
you open up this spiffy lower panel here,
which lets you customize the changes.
So let's do that.
Let me just scroll this up a bit.
So I'm going to go change to %ld,
and I'm going to go cast
the need saving to a long.
Now, some of you might be thinking, oh,
casting, that's so distasteful.
So %d says pick a long argument,
and here we're making sure
this argument is long.
So this is a perfectly safe,
very localized change,
and it's totally appropriate
to do in this case.
And so we go ahead and do it.
And this works for both 32-bit.
In the 32-bit, it acts just like before,
and in 64-bit, it also works.
We won't get any warnings.
So you can go ahead and
delete this warning.
Now, I will not go through
this file one by one.
I'll just scroll quickly,
and I want to show you one more case.
So this is a case that's going
to be sort of lame at the moment.
It didn't need to put this warning
because there was nothing to worry about,
but it did anyway.
In those cases,
just go ahead and delete the warning.
So I'm going to save this and close it.
Let me open another file
to show you another case.
This is multiple page view.
It's a subclass of NSView.
Note that the instance variable
unsigned was changed to NSU integer.
For instance variables,
you should probably pause a
bit and think about whether you
really want it to be NSU integer.
If the value is not likely
to go to above 4 billion,
you can leave it as an integer.
Instance variables and other data types,
other values that go into core data,
backing stores, your documents,
etc., you might think about whether
they need to be 64-bit because
they are a little more persistent
than stack variables and so on.
Now, in this case,
we have very few instances of
multiple page view in the application.
There's only one per document,
so I'm not going to worry about it.
And in most cases,
that's probably the right thing to do.
But if you have object that's
allocated by the thousands,
you might want to think about how big
the instance variables are getting.
So, with this, I'm not going to go
through the rest of this.
It's pretty straightforward.
But I'm going to go open a version
of TextEdit where I have fixed all
the pound warnings and nothing else.
So everything else is as TOPS did.
So let's go ahead and open
this version of TextEdit.
Let's make this window bigger.
Now I'm going to go ahead and
There we are.
I'm going to go ahead and
open the build inspector.
And you can see that
it's set to build I386.
Let's go ahead and build this.
And it's compiling and there it's done.
If you can see down here,
it compiled without any warnings.
Let's go ahead and bring the
inspector up again and change to
64-bit build and go ahead and build.
And you see that there's
already a few warnings.
Let's go take a look at
what warnings we've gotten.
The first one is about NSFont
methods not being there.
And again,
this is due to the deprecated or
unavailable APIs I mentioned earlier.
Some deprecated APIs,
we've totally removed them in 64-bit,
and that's why you're getting
this warning or this error when
you're trying to build for 64-bit.
So let's go look at this case here.
Width of string.
Now you might be wondering
how I deal with this.
Command double click brings up NSFont.h,
and you see that this is an
NSFont deprecated category,
and it says something about
use string drawing API instead.
Ah, that's good.
With that,
I will go ahead and delete these
two lines which have errors in them,
and I'll trust my demo
assistant to do the right thing,
and it did.
So as you can see,
size with attributes is the
replacement for width of string.
And this is the more
modern way to do this.
So this is good.
Let's save this, and let's go ahead and
look at our other warning.
There's this warning
about glyph is encoded.
This also is one of
those deprecated methods.
For that,
we need to get rid of these lines
and introduce two other lines.
There we go.
And finally,
we're getting a warning from QSort.
Let's open that one.
Now QSort is, as you know,
a low-level function,
and we're giving it a compare function.
It's compare.
It's complaining about
the return type of this.
If we search for this encoding compare,
which is up here,
you see that it was changed by
the script to return an S integer.
But QSort, being a low-level function,
doesn't know about an S integer.
It really wants an int.
So in this case,
we can undo what the script did,
change this back to an int.
Now this is something you
might have noticed when you
were going through file merge,
but of course I left it here so
that we could enjoy this moment.
So with that, I'm going to save this.
I'm going to close it,
and I'm going to go ahead and build.
So I'm going to open the app again,
and it builds.
No problem.
So let's go ahead and run this.
And there you go.
This is a 64-bit text edit.
I won't try to prove it right now to you,
but you can do this yourselves
and see that it's indeed 64-bit.
Okay, if you can go back to the slides,
please.
Okay, so the one question you
might be thinking is,
"Text-ed is 64-bit.
Does that mean I should port my
application to 64-bit?" And the
answer to this is complicated.
Frameworks, libraries, plugins.
If you own a framework,
if you own a library,
if you own a plugin that
other developers use,
please go ahead and make it
available in 64-bit so those other
developers can make the decision
to move to 64-bit themselves.
They need to have everything
they depend on be 64-bit.
For applications, it depends.
Again, as I said,
some applications really need it,
others maybe not.
Should they be ported in Leopard?
You know, we don't know.
By the way,
the more detailed answer to that
will be in the next session at 2 p.m.
But it really depends on
what you're trying to do.
Just as an aside,
the 64-bit Text-ed I showed you does have
the added feature that it can actually
open documents greater than 4 gigabytes,
which is what the old
Text-ed could not do.
And the Text system supports that.
So it's added.
It's actually capable.
It already has some benefit that
the 32-bit one didn't give you.
But is that good enough
reason to port to 64-bit?
Again, it's really case by case.
In any case, we encourage you to
write 64-bit clean code,
meaning for new code, use CGFloat,
use an S-integer, use an SU-integer.
Once in a while, build with 64-bit.
Make sure you're on the
right track so that if you do
decide to port at some point,
it's no big transition,
no big porting work.
And that would make it
easy for you at that point.
More information about the conversion
process and what it does to your code is
in the 64-bit Transition Guide for Cocoa,
which you can download
from the WWDC Connect site.
And we also have 64-bit labs,
three of them, tomorrow, Thursday,
and Friday, where we'll have engineers,
many engineers available to
help answer your questions.
And there will also be machines
if you want to come actually test
out your 64-bit applications since
you can't do it on your laptops.
Okay.
With that,
I'm going to invite Mark Petrueli
on stage to talk about Uniforce.
on stage to talk about
uniform type identifiers.
Thank you, Ali.
So, back in Pantherd,
we added a new facility to launch
services called Uniform Type Identifiers,
UTIs.
And now in Leopard,
we're adding full support to
UTIs for UTIs throughout Cocoa.
So, a really, really quick overview,
if you're not familiar.
What is a UTI?
Well, Uniform Type Identification
abstracts the concept of type.
So, if you've been working with Cocoa,
you know, historically,
we have a bunch of different namespaces
that all really represent the same thing,
you know, file types.
There's file name extensions like RTF,
there's HFS type codes like RTF space,
and there's pasteboard type names,
RTF keyboard type.
The kind of strings that fly
around in the NS Document API,
rich text format,
also sometimes used as the user
visible form of the file format.
And you don't see much of this in Cocoa,
but there's MIME types to deal with, too.
What UTIs does for you is it
provides a unified hierarchical
identification system.
So, you get to just work with this
one type namespace throughout
all the code in your application.
And the goal there,
the benefit is to reduce the
complexity of your application.
Another benefit, though,
is the fact that we can build in
information about a lot of different file
formats right into the operating system.
It's in this core types
bundle deep within the system.
Like, if you're using a file type,
you're going to have to have a
lot of different file formats.
It's in this core types
bundle deep within the system.
And you can see the names of the
types that we support in launch
services slash utcoretypes.h.
If you're importing Cocoa.h,
you're getting this header.
Just a quick sample of
what you'll find there.
Public.RTF, for instance, is the UTI,
the uniform type identifier
string for the rich text format.
And this reveals right here
a really big feature of UTIs,
the fact that it's a
hierarchical type namespace.
Rich text format documents
are plain text documents.
I'm sorry,
they're not plain text documents,
they're text documents.
And this is reflected by
the fact that the UTI,
public.RTF,
is said to conform to public.text.
And so these are the ones, you know,
there's a bunch of them declared
right in Tiger and in Leopard.
And, of course,
you get to declare your own
types that are identified by
uniform type identifiers in
your application's Info.plist.
So what are we doing to
support all this stuff?
We're supporting Cocoa.h.
Now in Leopard,
we're supporting them pretty much
everywhere you would expect we would
in your Info.plist declarations.
We added a bunch of
methods to this workspace.
And this document controller,
whose APIs deal very
heavily in file types,
now deal in UTIs.
OpenPanel and SavePanel take UTIs.
Pasteboard takes UTIs.
And a miscellany of other AppKit classes
also take UTIs or applicable.
And, you know, one nice,
another nice benefit of all
this is there's now a better,
match between Cocoa and other
relatively new APIs in Leopard,
like Spotlight's metadata
framework and image IO framework.
So what kind of stuff will
you find in your application's
Info.plist if you're using UTIs?
Well, just to go back,
if you're writing an application
that doesn't take advantage
of any Leopard features,
it looks something
like what's on the top.
This is like the document type
declaration for text edit,
for rich text format.
And you have to put the
file name extension,
RTF.
You have to specify a
file name for the icon,
a corresponding MIME type,
a type name that will be
used in NSDocument APIs.
And by the way,
NSRTF pBoard type is actually an
abbreviation that we allow you to put in
your Info.plist for a much longer string
that's more or less human readable.
And then also the HFS type code,
the four character code, RTF.
So if you look at the
one on the bottom now,
if you're writing an application
that just depends on Leopard,
you don't have to declare all
that stuff because in this case,
RTF is actually declared
as part of the system.
So you can just say public.rtf.
Now we know we want you to use
these new Leopard features,
but of course we also know that
you want to ship applications very
often that still run on Tiger.
In the case of this feature,
we're really paying attention to
what it will take for you to do that.
So it turns out it's pretty convenient
that you can just leave all the
Tiger stuff in your Info.plist and just
add a little bit of stuff to start taking
advantage of UTIs in your application.
So LS Item Content Types in this
example is ignored by Cocoa on Tiger.
Launch Services still pays
attention to it on Tiger.
But because it's pretty much
consistent with all that other stuff,
you can't really tell
that Launch Services is
doing anything on Tiger.
Except when it's being used
from other applications,
of course.
On Leopard,
these things are ignored by Cocoa because
there is an LS Item Content types
entry and that's its trigger to
start ignoring the old stuff.
These ones, CFBundle type name and
CFBundle icon file,
are optional.
They were required on Tigrip and
now they're optional on Leopard.
These are what you still provide even in
an all-Leopard application if you want
to override the default user visible
name for a file format and its icon.
So, and this brings up an issue.
I said that LS Item Content Types
triggers a bunch of new behavior.
Well, for backward binary compatibility,
it takes more than that.
You have to link your
application against the version
of Cocoa that's part of Leopard.
So, this is something to pay attention
to the first time you build
your application on Leopard,
is that if you have
LS Item Content Types in your Info.plist,
all of a sudden a whole bunch of
new strings are going to start
flying around in NS Document,
Document Controller API,
and some of your subclasses
may need updating for that.
So, and of course,
if you just want to stick
with the old behavior,
well, that's what the SDKs are for.
You can just link against the 10.4 SDK.
So, some new methods we added to
NSWorkspace where we're putting
most of the new support for
UTIs that requires new methods.
Type of file error
given a path to a file,
return its UTI or an error that you
can present to the user explaining what
went wrong while trying to do that.
Localized description for type.
If you need to show the user
the name of a file format,
like an alert or something like that,
this is the method to call.
Preferred file name extension for type.
If you're writing out a file and you need
to know which file name extension to slap
on the end of the name so that it gets
identified properly as the correct type,
this is the method to use for that.
File name extension is valid
for type is actually something
that's used by save panel.
And why we introduced this is because in
this hierarchical namespace now of UTIs,
you really have to ask the
exact correct question.
You can't just get the file name
extension for UTI and then compare
it to the one that the user typed in.
You sort of have to let Cocoa with
launch services help answer the question.
So save panel uses this when it's
letting the user type a file name
extension to see if it's one that works.
And the last one is pretty important.
Type conforms to type,
returns a yes or no answer.
Answers the question,
is this first type a
subtype of the second one?
So if you pass this
public.rtf and public.text,
it'll return yes.
And this is what you're going
to use in a lot of places
instead of just comparing UTIs.
You don't just compare
them for string equality,
you do this conformance check and
it opens up a lot of flexibility
in what your applications do.
So NS Document Controller has
also been heavily updated.
Methods like, there's a bunch of methods
that have been updated,
but I'll just go through a few of them.
Default type in an application
whose types are declared with UTIs
will pick one of the document type
declarations from the Info.plist.
And because LS Item Content Types
is actually an array,
it'll return the first
UTI out of that array.
So the order of the UTIs listed in
that array matters for some things.
Make Untitled Document of Type Error and
all the other creation routines have all
been updated to accept UTIs in addition
to the old style NS Document type
names that were used before.
Type for contents of
URL returns the UTI for a file.
And with the type that's returned,
if you're checking to see can
my application handle this,
you don't do the equality check.
You use that NSWorkspace
type conforms to type method.
And methods of AppKit's own,
like NSDocumentController,
DocumentClusterType, do do that.
They use type conformance so
that if the type of a file is
something that wasn't even known
when your application was created,
but does conform to one of the types
that your application claims to handle,
your application will
be able to handle it,
even though the file name
extension is brand new,
was invented after you
shipped your application.
As long as, by the way,
the application that declares that type,
you know, declares the type conformance.
Two methods that we're not updating,
file extensions from type
and type from file extension,
don't work correctly with UTIs and
we're not making them work with UTIs,
we're just deprecating them because they
answer questions that don't make so much
sense anymore in the context of UTIs.
And likewise,
NSDocument has been updated.
So, readable types and writable types are
default implementations with return UTIs.
IsNativeType gets this conformance
checking concept right.
NSDocument has always
been very customizable.
It's a really heavily overridden class.
We want to maintain that customizability
as we add new facilities to it.
So, just to make sure everything
stays open to you,
we're adding this method,
file name extension for type
colon save operation colon.
And it's used when NSDocument
is going to save a file,
but it doesn't know what file name
extension to put on it yet because
it's being done because of auto-saving
or scripting or something like that.
It'll call this,
and if you have a complicated plug-in
mechanism or something like that,
you'll get a chance to
control what NSDocument does.
So when your application is using UTIs
because it has these LS item content
types entries in its info P list,
they're going to be flying around in
all the method invocations between
NSDocument and Document Controller.
And if you're subclassing one of these,
your subclasses are going
to have to understand UTIs.
So you're probably going to have to
update them when you switch to UTIs.
And this is a good opportunity if
you're updating what NSDocument methods
your application overrides anyway,
to stop overriding the ones
we deprecated in Tiger,
which by the way haven't been updated
at all to handle this UTI stuff.
So take the opportunity to get off
the NSDeprecated methods and start
using uniform type identifiers.
And a great side benefit of this
is much better error handling,
which is why we introduced all
those methods into NSDocument.
in Tiger.
The open panel and the save panel have
likewise been updated to accept UTIs.
They had methods that would
take arrays that were,
we allowed you to mix file name
extensions and HFS type codes together.
Now you can mix UTIs in with all those,
and we have a reliable
way to distinguish them,
so we can support this without
having to add any new methods.
Their implementations understand the
rules that you just don't compare UTIs,
you check one UTI for
conformance with another.
And likewise,
save panel accepts and returns UTIs.
Pasteboard, of course,
has been updated too.
So, you know, it's going to be nice,
it's going to be less code because
there's just one unified namespace,
one uniform unified namespace,
for all the types that
exist in your applications.
There's not going to be pasteboard
types and file name extensions anymore.
So there's just UTIs.
And now you can pass
UTIs like KUT type TIFF,
which is the
Launch Services Declaration for
public.TIFF,
right into pasteboard methods.
Methods like NSPasteboard types
for backward compatibility
still return the old type names,
so you don't have to update any code.
They also now, mixed right into the list,
return the new type names, the UTIs.
And we've done this before,
mixing the old and the new style type
names in the arrays that we return,
and your code is expected to
pick out the ones it cares about,
and that's worked out pretty well,
and so we're doing it here too.
Now I know some of you have already tried
to pass UTIs to NSPasteboard methods,
and it didn't work.
For instance, you promised data of a
specific type using a UTI,
and when NSPasteboard called back
for you to fulfill that promise,
the string was just
not what you passed in.
So now that we're officially
supporting UTIs with NSPasteboard,
if you pass in a UTI and
you make a promise,
you'll get that same UTI back
when you're asked to fulfill
the Pasteboard data promise.
- Thanks.
So other AppKit classes.
NSImage and NSImageRep have a
pretty sophisticated system for
determining what subclass of
NSImageRep should be instantiated for
a particular pasteboard item or file.
And that's all being updated
to take advantage of UTIs.
And we're doing it in such a way
that you don't have to update
your entire application to use
this new typing scheme at once.
So if you're overriding
NSImageRep and it overrides the
methods that return type names,
you can start overriding the new
methods that return UTIs instead.
Without having to, for instance,
update all your invocations
of the NSImage methods
that instantiate NSImages.
And vice versa.
So you don't have to do your
whole application all at once.
And this is all, of course,
documented in great detail
in the release notes.
NSSound and AppKit's additions to
the distributed string have the same
sort of methods for handling the
types of things that get loaded.
And likewise, they've been updated.
So let me show you a quick
demo of some of this stuff.
So let me show you just one of the
methods that you might be overriding
in an application like TextEdit.
Updated to use UTIs now instead
of the old style type names.
This one is default type.
TextEdit has a preference when
you create a new document.
You want to create a rich text
document or a plain text document.
And which one it does is control by
this document controller default type,
which it overrides just to get the
value from the preference and pick one.
UTI or the other.
No big whoop.
Let me show you the InfoP list
for what TextEdit looks like now.
And by the way,
TextEdit in Leopard has been updated
to be an NSDocument based application.
So when I show you TextEdit,
as far as the user shouldn't
see any difference we're hoping,
but now you have more
NSDocument example code.
So one of the nice things about just the
way this is arranged in the InfoP list
now is because you can list so many
UTIs in one document type declaration,
it ends up being,
your InfoP list ends up being a great bit
shorter and simpler than the old ones.
So TextEdit handles
seven document formats,
including some Microsoft Word ones
and Open Document,
all in the same way.
So we just list them all.
They all result in instantiation
of the document class,
and it's an editor for all of them.
We break out rich text into its own
entry because we have this little "Ls
is Apple default for type" on there.
So that's a little TextEdit trick
to make sure that it gets to look
at the rich text documents when
the user is clicking on things.
So, and then the last thing,
the other reason to have a
separate document type declaration
is because for a few types,
um, TextEdit is just a viewer.
So for this UTI,
which identifies old style
simple text documents,
TextEdit can view them,
but it doesn't try and save them.
And for public data,
this is one of the super types
of pretty much everything.
And, you know,
can you really open any file in TextEdit?
No.
But TextEdit is meant to
be a really general tool,
so it's game.
It claims it'll open public.data.
Now, just to show you something
actually running,
let me show you a little
user interface refinement.
You know how in open panels
you're supposed to disable the
files that the application can't
actually open successfully?
And we really weren't able to do
that correctly in TextEdit before
because we want to make sure that
people who are using TextEdit as the
editor of the last resort don't get
hassled by the open panel saying,
"No,
TextEdit doesn't know how to to open it.
So what we did is--
We're using just the regular Info
P-List declaration from TextEdit.
We're saying that TextEdit
can open any text document.
So when you look at its open panel now,
it can open any text document,
including .h files,
and TextEdit didn't have to list .h
files explicitly in its Info.plist,
but not icon files,
because the icon file type is
not declared to be a subtype
of text or anything like that.
So, you know,
this is a little bit better UI, but,
you know,
TextEdit as the editor of last resort,
we don't want to, you know,
hassle our users.
They're like, you know,
let me just open it.
So we added this checkbox
to open any type,
and that makes, you know, the open panel,
you know, enable this file.
So, and TextEdit will give it a go.
Garbage in, garbage out.
So, so to do this UI,
what we did is we overrode the
NSOpenPanel delegate method
that controls this stuff.
And if the preference is set
to open file of any type,
it returns yes.
And if it doesn't,
what it does is it invokes
this NSWorkspace method that
I keep telling you about.
It gets the UTI of the file.
And then one thing you have to do here,
if it's a folder in an open panel,
you have to return yes so that the open
panel will let you navigate into that.
And we check to do that.
We just see if whatever the file type is,
if it conforms to the folder type,
just return yes.
And otherwise, well,
let's see if it's readable according
to what's declared in the application.
So, and Texas Document Controller has
a pretty simple method.
It's readable type.
And it goes through all the types that
all the subclasses of NSDocument has.
There's just one, but it's general code,
so it goes through the list.
And it does stuff like if
it conforms to the type,
it says yes.
So it's able to do the proper UI while
still handling a wide variety of file
formats that aren't even known at
the time that TextEdit is shipping.
So that's it for the demo.
Slides.
So that's about it for UTIs.
If you're writing a new
application for Leopard,
we want you to start using
UTIs right away because it's
going to simplify your code,
your application is going to mesh well
with all the new API that we and other
groups keep introducing into Mac OS X.
And if your application needs to
run on both Tiger and Leopard,
we still want you to
give it a try using UTIs.
You'll have to pay
attention to some issues,
but you'll be able to get a
few improved type handling
and interoperability features,
and you'll still be able to
make your application work
on Tiger while you do that.
So for more information about UTIs,
it's in the place it's been
for a while now on the website.
So developer.apple.com, Mac OS X,
uniform type identifiers.
No spaces or underscores.
And for information
about what's in Cocoa,
please, please read our release notes.
This is one of the issues about
which it is really detailed.
So it's on the website, you know,
release notes slash
Cocoa slash appkit dot html.
So with that,
I'd like you to invite Kevin Perry on
the stage to talk to you about
resolution independence in Cocoa.
Thank you.
As you can tell,
I'm the intern in the AppKit group,
and it's kind of obvious because
I'm the only one actually
wearing the T-shirt they gave us.
But I will be talking to you
about resolution independence.
And what it means for you and
your applications in Cocoa.
So really quick,
what is resolution independence?
When you draw in resolution
independence in your programs,
there isn't really a direct relationship
between the size of your drawing that
you're drawing in your applications
and the size it's actually going
to be rendered to on the screen.
And you've always drawn in
units that are called points,
which are resolution independent.
And of course,
screen coordinates are pixels.
And with resolution independence,
another way to define it is that one
point will not map to a pre-known
number of pixels on the screen.
So let's go over what exactly that means.
And with Cocoa, we've always had a
resolution independent model.
As you can see here in this diagram,
there are three different
coordinate systems.
First, on the screen,
that of course is its own coordinate
system represented in pixels.
The window coordinate system,
which we also call the
base coordinate system,
is also represented in pixels.
And the view inside the window
has its own coordinate system,
which we also call the
local coordinate system,
which is represented in points.
And we can say that Cocoa has
sort of a resolution independent
model because on views,
we're able to apply certain
transformations to them,
such as this view.
We've just applied a 1.5x scale
factor or zoom factor to it.
And it's now no longer 450 by 600 points,
but 300 by 400 points.
And so there,
we can kind of say there's not
a direct mapping between points
and pixels as there was before.
Until this point, Cocoa hasn't,
in a general sense,
taken advantage of this model for
drawing its user interface elements.
And you as developers,
when you do your drawing
in your applications,
you could assume that you've got
a one-to-one mapping of points
to pixels and be generally safe.
However,
you can no longer make that assumption
because of the changes we're
making to resolution independence.
So to go over what problems we
have with resolution independence,
as technology advances and we have
displays with higher pixel densities,
we get additional quality,
which is a good thing.
However, take this example here.
We've got a 72 dpi screen with a
window that's 600 by 900 pixels,
and it's drawn fine on the 72 dpi screen.
However, without any modifications,
we run that on a 144 dpi screen,
and you can see that you basically have
to squint to see anything in the view.
So this isn't a desired effect at all.
And our solution for this is to have
Cocoa automatically apply a scaling
factor to the top level view and the
entire view hierarchy inside your
windows so that it will be scaled
to a comfortable size for users.
So in this example,
whereas the window in the 72
DPI screen was 600 by 900 pixels,
we apply a scale factor of 2.0.
So we resize the window to
be 1,200 by 1,800 pixels.
And you notice that the view is
still inside 450 by 600 points.
That's because points are
resolution independent.
And so we can scale the entire
coordinate system without actually
changing the coordinates within it.
So just a quick overview.
Remember that you've got
screen frame units in pixels,
window frame units also in pixels,
and view frame and balance units
in resolution independent points.
So when you do computations of
coordinates for custom layout or whatnot,
you need to make sure that you're
in the correct coordinate system.
NSView has always provided API for
you to convert between coordinate
systems and different views
and also to the window space.
You can see here that we're
converting a rectangle from view nil,
which means that we're converting
the rectangle from the window space,
that's what the nil means,
to the local space of the view.
And here we're doing the opposite.
We're converting the rectangle to
the window space by passing nil
as the second parameter there.
And of course there is a similar
API for points and sizes.
Something you have been able to
do before the advent of resolution
independence is the following,
where you want to compute the
content rect for your window,
and so you get the window frame,
and just do a simple subtraction
to find the rectangle that's
for your content view.
However,
that obviously will not work when you've
got a scale factor that's not 1.0,
because you're going between
coordinate systems there.
And so the correct thing to do is
use the NSWindow API that's existed
since 10.0 to do this for you.
You just get the window frame and then
pass it to content rect for frame rect,
and that will automatically apply the,
take into account the
scale factor for you.
And in Cocoa, it's always been optimal,
of course, to draw on pixel boundaries.
And that was easy when you could
assume that one point was equal to
one pixel because you could just,
in a local coordinate system,
align things to points.
However, if you have, for example,
a non-integral scale factor
now with resolution dependence,
and you integralize all
your point boundaries,
then when it's converted
up to the screen,
you're going to have
non-integral pixel boundaries,
which is going to cause certain effects
in your drawing that are not desirable.
So the correct thing to do is not use,
for example, nsintegral rect, floor,
round, whatever on point values.
In the local coordinate system.
Use the API that I just talked about
to convert to window coordinates first.
So here we've got a rectangle that
we're first converting to window space.
Then we can use nsintegral rect,
and then convert back to view space
so that we can draw it in our view.
And there is a method on
NSVUE called center scan rect,
which we intend to handle
the basic case for you,
the most common case.
And the method works somewhat in
the seed that you've got right now.
It's not perfect,
but we do intend to improve
it for Leopard release.
But you can go ahead and
experiment with it now.
This will do the conversion between
coordinate systems and all that for you.
All right, so let me see who is really
proud of all their artwork in
their Mac OS X applications.
OK, I'm sure there are a lot of
you who like to boast about it.
And it's really great because that's
part of the Mac OS X user experience.
And we really appreciate all the effort
you do to make those good looking images.
But as I said before,
with the scale factor applied
to the entire view hierarchy,
we're also resizing all of
your images automatically.
So just imagine all of your
beautiful artwork scaled up to,
say, twice its normal size.
Probably not a pretty
picture in most cases.
And so this is something that
Cocoa can't solve directly for you,
but we do make it pretty
easy for you as developers,
though it may not be quite so
easy for your graphic designers.
So, there's two possible solutions.
Where possible,
try to switch to vector-based art.
That is obviously automatically
going to scale correctly and
look great at any scale factor.
However, for bitmap images,
if you need to use those,
we suggest that you supply your
bitmaps at one time and four
times their normal resolution
in a multi-representation TIFF.
Making sure to set the
DPI appropriately so that they are
actually drawn to the same size.
And you can see an introspective
view of one of these images
where we've got two image
representations with the same size but
The first step is to create a new image.
The image is going to be four times the
size for the second image representation.
When you do that,
when you ask NS Image to draw your image,
it will automatically look at
the scale factor and select the
correct image representation.
Using the quality image
interpolation that we have,
scale that down to the correct size
and make sure that your images still
look great at any scale factor.
And as Chris Parker mentioned
in the previous talk,
we do intend to publish several named
images that will use high res art
for the most commonly used images,
such as the ad.
and remove plus and minus signs.
That's not in the seed at this point,
but we do intend to put that
into the leopard release.
OK, so we're going to have a quick Q&A,
but this is going to be kind
of different because I'm going
to be asking all the questions,
and you get to listen to all the answers.
So you can wait until later
to ask all your questions.
So the first question is,
how do I know what scale factor
has been applied to my window?
The answer is, well,
you really shouldn't need to know this.
But NSWindow does provide API for this
in the user space scale factor method.
And this might be useful in cases
where you want to maybe save your
window frames to disk manually.
So before you do this,
you want to invert the scale factor done
to the window so that in case the window
is read from disk in an environment
with a different scale factor,
it can be reapplied when you read it.
And you don't get any explosions
of window size or anything.
But remember,
this is not for use in converting between
view and window coordinate systems.
There are a lot of other
transformations that may be
applied to your views that you just
can't take into account with this.
So use the API that
we've provided in NSView.
It's really the simplest way to do this.
Next question is,
I have an offscreen view
that shouldn't be scaled.
How do I prevent automatic scaling?
Well, in Tiger,
we've provided this ability for you
using the NSUnscaledWindowMask when
applied to the NSBorderlessWindowMask.
Yes, that's right.
You can only use this
on borderless windows.
But it's a pretty simple solution here.
You just apply it.
and pass it into the init method.
Okay, next question.
I happen to know that OpenGL has to
draw in pixels for it to be correct.
How does that work in a scaled window?
The answer is we're going to
make NSOpenGLView internally
perform an inverse transform on
the bounds of the view so that
internally the OpenGLView can
draw directly to pixel values.
And externally, you're using the view.
It'll be normal.
The frame is still in points.
So, all this is handled
automatically for you.
You don't really need
to worry about this.
But discuss that because for those of
you who have resolution dependent views,
you can do the same
sort of transformation,
though this shouldn't be very common.
Last question,
probably one of the most important.
How do I test my application
for resolution independence?
We hope you all go and
do this fairly quickly,
because it's fairly easy.
You just launch Quartz Debug,
and you can find this window,
the User Interface Resolution window.
And we suggest choosing 1.25, 1.5,
and 2.0 as representative scale factors
to see how your app will work in
general with resolution independence.
And then relaunch your
application and see how it works.
So it's that simple.
OK,
continuing with the common theme here,
we're going to--
do resolution independence
check for text edit.
So let's get the demo machine, please.
Thank you.
So let's go ahead and set, let's say,
just 2.0 scale factor.
We're going to test this out.
Launch text edit.
Boom.
That actually looks pretty good.
We haven't done any
changes to this at all.
We've got pretty much just standard
Cocoa controls and Cocoa text.
So there's really not any work that
needs to be done to prepare a text
edit for resolution independence.
So no work done there.
We really like that.
For a more representative view of this,
we've prepared a little
bit of sample code here.
We've got a beginning of a Minesweeper
game that uses custom layout with images
and so forth to draw its minefield.
So here we've got a typical minefield.
You can resize it or make
the minefield larger,
whatever.
Just really simple.
But let's go ahead and run this at, say,
1.25 scale factor.
I can't really see that there
on the projector very well,
but I've launched Pixie here to show you.
In between a lot of these images
are these pixel-wide cracks.
And as I mentioned before,
this happens when we're drawing
on non-integral pixel values.
So there's something wrong
there with our drawing routines.
And also when we try and
resize this minefield,
the window isn't getting
set to the correct size.
So let's go and investigate
what's going on there.
Go ahead and open our View subclass here.
Here we've got our drawRects,
and we're calculating the size
of the rectangle here that we're
going to draw the image into.
And here we're calling a method
which is just right up here.
This is where we're integralizing
the rect and everything.
And you know what,
we're doing this in view coordinates.
We haven't done any sort
of transformation here.
So let's go ahead and insert.
The necessary method to convert
first to window coordinates.
And then we can integrate this
directly in window coordinates.
And then we convert back
to view coordinates,
because that's what we have to draw in.
So that should fix the
pixel crack problem.
And down here,
where we set the number of squares,
so this is where we're
resizing our window as well,
right here,
we are computing the delta that
we want to resize our window by.
And you know what?
We're doing that in terms
of view coordinates.
So that isn't being set
correctly with our scale factor.
So we want to make sure that we convert
the size first to window coordinates so
that the window is resized correctly.
And there's a little interesting behavior
of the convert size to view method.
If you just happen to have
negative values in your size,
when you pass it through
convert size to view,
it's normalized to a positive value.
So we actually have to,
before we convert it,
We need to check whether
the size is negative.
Save that state.
And then, after we're done converting it,
we restore it.
That should handle the window resizing,
and we'll just run this again.
Again, we're still in 1.25 scale factor.
And switch back over to Pixie here,
and you see there's not
any pixel corrects anymore.
We've solved that problem by making sure
that we're drawing on pixel boundaries.
And when we resize the minefield,
it resizes it to the
correct size of the window.
So that looks pretty good
for preparing this app for
resolution independence as well.
So it could be that simple
for your applications as well.
So let's switch over back
to the slides if we could.
And let me invite Kristin Forster back
up for a summary of all the points
that we've gone over in this talk.
Thank you, Kevin.
So to summarize,
we'd like you to consider converting
your application to 64-bit for
increased data handling capabilities.
And as Ali said,
this is especially important if you
have a plug-in or a framework or a
library that somebody else is relying on.
We'd like you to start using uniform type
identifiers for improved type management,
and we'd like you to prepare your
application for resolution independence
so it looks great on high DPI displays.
For more information you
can contact Derek Horne,
Application Frameworks Evangelist.
You should also check out the
documentation attached to this
session on the conference website.
And please come see us in the
APCIT lab Thursday at 2:00.
And as Ali mentioned,
there's also 64-bit labs
running throughout the week.